I am very grateful and hope to see
you all again. I
really want to hear you say, "Teacher, I
have won!"
[Music]
Children, we're
about to say goodbye, I will miss you all
very much.
[Music]
I also miss all of you who have been well-
behaved
during this time. I see that you have
tried your best,
and
I have a concern, children.
That concern is for those of you who are not yet well-behaved. You all returned
from the summer retreat,
but there are still some of you who are
very disadvantaged. It
could be due to circumstances, or some obstacle
in your hearts that you have
n't yet broken free from the constraints
of your thoughts. [Music] That's why
I'm worried.
Although the number of such children is very small, I
see that some of you haven't yet broken free from your thoughts and personal obstacles. I see that some of you haven't consciously
eaten well,
some of you are
trapped and
bound in a slave mentality, you are
led astray by bad thoughts, you are
followed by things that are not really
good,
some of you are bound by them.
In this enslaved heart, she hopes that
today,
although time has run out, she and
her children must part ways.
She hopes to one day welcome them back
with a victory over themselves.
She is
very happy
that her children already possess a good heart
[music],
and that their good heart has developed.
But
that joy
will not compare to the joy
when some of them break free from the
shackles
of unwholesome thoughts, escaping to
affirm themselves,
conquering those unwholesome thoughts, and
conquering the
slavery
of those who are
not yet good or
enlightened. Win, my
children!
I hope to welcome you back
in victory.
I am not present to accompany you from
morning till night, but
I am always by your side, never
leaving for a single moment.
Everything that you have not perfected
during these seven days of practice is within
the concern of the master, the monks, and me
[music].
This is a place
you can return to whenever you want.
If you
have no one to share with,
this place is
ready to extend a hand and
share with you. If you do not yet have a
way to...
To overcome all obstacles and conquer yourselves, this place
welcomes you,
accompanying you on your journey
so that you can
become someone you can be proud
of. I sincerely hope for your well-being,
happiness, and that you
will recognize what is not beneficial to
you.
Overcome that;
that is the strength you possess,
and you must use it. I
believe that you, my children, with your
determination,
will win. See
you again,
not just next year, but
anytime you want.
Come back here to your master, the monks, me,
and everyone else. See you again, my children. I
love you all very much. May you be well.
Thank you for everything I have taught you, and I hope to see you again. I
really want to hear you say, "Teacher, I have
won!" I
don't want to fall, my dear friend, I don't want to
part ways. So many memories, but so much shared,
a summer retreat that year, the
first day we met, how far away it all seems.  It's strange how
today's farewell feels like this
[music]
Those times we turned around, you and
I, the competition, the fun, remember, remember, remember, I
remember, the shopping, the
[Applause]
[music] My
dear friend, I
don't want to leave, my
dear friend, I don't want to say goodbye, so
many memories, but the sharing, so full of
that summer retreat
[Laughter] The
day we met, we were so strangers,
but today's farewell feels like
this, those
times we turned around, cooking, eating,
OK, having fun,
remember, how I remember, my dear friend, remember, the summer retreat,
always joyful in the light of Buddha.
See you next year. In the sad past, the
first day we met, so distant, so strange,
and today's farewell, and the cold wind like
this,
remember one morning waking up, those times we turned
around, you and I, at that time, my life,
remember that, my dear friend, those people.
See you next year, it's been too long, summer. My dear friend, see you next
year,
summer retreat
[music]